Hey friends. I want to
thank our sponsor. Reagan, are
you struggling to replicate the
bugs and performance issues that
your customers are reporting? Plug
Regan into your web and
mobile applications right now, and
diagnose problems in minutes rather
than hours. Kiss goodbye. Having
to dig through log files
and relying on frustrated users
to report issues, make your
software development life so much
easier. Using Reagan's error, crash,
and performance monitoring tools. Every
software team can create flawless
software experiences for their customers
with Regan. Try it free
today@raygun.com. That's our a Y
G U n.com. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes
today. I'm talking with dr.
Alex Constantine. She's a director
of data science at tandem
diabetes care and a fellow
type one diabetic. How are
you? Hi, I'm very well.
Thank you. How are you?
I'm getting there. I feel
like between us, we've got
like 50 plus years at
diabetes experience here. This is
pretty cool. Although I'm been
living it, you've been living
it, but then you also
have a background in data
science. So you get to
manage your own disease with
an expertise under that understands
the data that you're, that
you're creating. Yeah, I, I
think some of the, my
diabetes knowledge definitely started personal
and with a lot of
training, like most people, but
now I combine what I
find in the data with
those hypothesis that they've developed
from personal experience and to
just look at what, what
the data tells us Now,
when I became a type
one diabetic in the nineties,
I would prick my finger
and I would wait about
a minute until a little
piece of gauze turned blue
and then a little light
sensor would look at the
color of blue and then
the darker, the blue, the
more sugar I had in
my blood. And it was,
and that was pretty fancy
for the nineties. And then
I would write that into
an Excel sheet or on
a piece of paper. And
I would log that. I
think I would check my
blood sugar, maybe five or
10 times a day. And
everyone thought that I was
checking so much. Why would
you check your blood sugar
so much? How did you
start out? Well, so I
was diagnosed when I was
seven and they grew up
in Romania. So it's still
early nineties, but that technology
hadn't quite all gotten through
Romania at that point. So
I was admitted to the
hospital when I was diagnosed
and they spent about a
month there to get my
insulin dosing quite right. And
at that time, no one
was using pest strips as
the common way of testing
blood sugar. So I was
getting blood drawn intravenously to
test how my blood sugar
was before and after meals
and really adjust those doses.
So it was very driven.
It all had to happen
in the hospital. And then
a few, a few years
in, we got test strips
and were able to use
those at home. And that
really changed things. That's a
really good point. And even
now in 2020, a lot
of the technology still isn't
accessible to people for geographical
reasons, whether it be a
far flung places, far away
from where the labs are,
or whether it be cost
or medical, depending on the
medical industry within that country,
there are things that I
can do and you can
do now here that may
not be available back home,
Right? We have all the
best technology right now is
systems that are able to
adjust insulin doses in real
time based on continuous glucose
monitoring, but that's not really
readily accessible to a lot
of people. And that's something
that hopefully will, will change
over time. And more people
will benefit from this technology.
Indeed. There's definitely people still
who are doing what they
call MDI, right? Multiple daily
injections. They prick their fingers
and they take injections the
same way that I did
30 plus years ago. So
it would be nice to
make those things available to
them. But the one thing
that they all have in
common and they always have
had in common is they're
producing data. That feels like
it's a thing about diabetes.
That's quite unique. We create
a lot of data about
our bodies and always have,
Right. The diabetes is certainly
one of the most data
driven conditions that I know
about between the continuous glucose
monitoring, which is both at
use as outcomes, but also
as inputs to all the
decisions you're making and all
of the factors that can
affect blood glucose levels. There's
really a lot of data
that you could have. And
a lot of data that
is hidden in the background
affects blood glucose levels, but
we can't quite measure or
really do do data science
about. Yeah. One of the
things that I've always found
frustrating about diabetes is it
will, you can tell me
what my blood sugar is
this moment, but I don't
know if I'm doing a
good job until 20 years
from now when I don't
go blind or when I
don't have a cardiac issue
or I don't lose my,
my kidneys. So there's all
this data and producing every
day, all the time for
the last 20 or 30
years. But by the time
I find out if it
worked or not, it's too
late. Yeah. Well, there are
some outcomes that are immediate
than some that are longer
term. I think they'd be,
these is a balancing act.
You, you want to provide
insulin because your body is
no longer producing it, but
getting the dose just right
is very difficult. And if
you give too much, then
you have hypoglycemia, which can
have it maybe had consequences.
So you might feel a
little bit shaky or sweaty
if it's really extreme and
it's not treated, you could
have seizures or lose consciousness
and up in the hospital
or, or even die. So
that that's very acute then
preventing that is a big
focus. Would that be these
management, but then if you
don't give enough insulin, and
if you have chronic hyperglycemia,
then you're at risk of
these microvascular complications, which will
show up years later, like
you said, so it's, it's
all, it's a control engineering
problem. You're trying to keep
things in this very tight,
narrow range and account for
all the factors that might,
might influence glucose levels and
also predict them. And unlike
other control engineering problems, humans
have been the ones who
were, who were manually solving
the control problems. And now
with the introduction of automated
insulin delivery systems, that's changing
a little bit, but there's
still a lot that people
have to actually do. They
have to be the control
engineers, whether I'm an amateur
expert, That is a really
good point. So there's two
things that I want to
parse out. First, you point
out that the, the, the
quick urgency of diabetes I
eat, I just had a
sandwich. I ate lunch actually
two hours ago. I'm thinking
about even, well, we are
having this conversation about what
my blood sugar is now,
right now, I'm at one
70, which is high, but
it's an hour after eating.
So hopefully it'll be back
down to a hundred within
an hour or so. And
I'm trying to get back
down softly. Like I don't
want to crash and have
an awful afternoon, but I
do want to get down
quickly and comfortably so that
I don't have an issue
like you talked about, but
then there's the, well, if
I hit one 80 every
single day at lunchtime for
20 years, what kind of
microvascular things might I deal
with in 20 years in
the past, as you said,
I have to look at
the numbers and I have
to make the decision. So
in control engineering, you have
a sensor, you have a
detector, and you think about
your, your output performance and
you kind of loop don't,
you, you look at the
number and you make a
decision, but I don't know
if everyone is good at
that. That seems like a
very unfair thing for a
disease to make me have
to be good at math,
Right? It takes a lot
of math and that constant
monitoring, because most control systems
have these time steps, that
where they look and make
decisions. And they're every five
minutes, every 15 minutes, whatever
they are, but it's very
frequent. So you want to
go out and live life
and not worry about diabetes
so much. So I'm having
to do all of that
as a human you're obviously
going to have a much
longer control interval, which will
make your glycaemic outcomes suffer,
but there's always this trade
off between glycaemic outcomes, safety,
and use the ability or
the ability to go live
your life. So when you
think about a control system,
it's like cruise control on
a car, right? I mean,
you're thinking about the speed
and you're adjusting the motor
as you go forward and
backward. And I think that
maybe basic self driving cars
to try to stay inside
the lane or a kind
of a control system, but
they really are just focused
on the moment. Right? Do
control systems think about the
future that they think about
days in advance or weeks
in advance, or they only
think about the now, Well,
th there's definitely several components
there. So you have a
prediction component and that's especially
because of what, one of
the factors you mentioned. So
insulin that's given exogenously is
not the same as the
insulin, a healthy pancreas might
produce. It takes a lot
longer for it to start
acting that, showing an effect
on blood glucose and also
a very long time to
leave your system compared to
the glucose your pancreas might
produce. So at the insulin.
So because of that, you
have to predict a lot
more. If insulin was really
fast and you could see
its action immediately, and it
really went the way quickly,
then this would be a
much easier problem, but because
you have to predict and
weight and measure everything that's
already in your system, and
what will it do three,
four hours from now, there's
definitely a big prediction component
to it. And then there's
the adjustment when, when things
are different, from what you're
expecting, how do you adjust
the insulin levels? And then
there's also the, the models
and parameters underlying that. What,
what is the effect of
insulin on blood glucose? So
as the effect of carbohydrates
from meals on, on blood
glucose, and those have parameters
that are very specific to
individuals, And then that, that
word that you use, the
people who are listening may
not be familiar with exogenous
insulin, that's insulin, your body
doesn't make. So you're saying
that regular people, the normals,
the normally sugared people, they
have insulin that's coming from
the inside of their body
while we're basically shoving insulin
in. And we're using fat
on the outside of our
body to absorb that insulin,
which is not really what
fat is for, is it
Right? Right. So it creates
the, from reactions, from what
you would see in, in
a presume without diabetes. So
when you're thinking about this
in the context of data
science, there's all these variables
to think about. There's variables
that you've identified and you've
noticed, and you fed into
your models, but then there's
a lot of hidden variables.
Like right now I had
my sandwich, my blood sugar
is going up a little
faster than I would have
liked it to. I did
everything right though. And the
part that I find so
surprising and frustrating about diabetes.
And I wonder if you
do as well, is it
worked yesterday? Why doesn't it
work today? How do you
solve for hidden variables like
that? Right. Well, there there's
a lot going on. And
Adam Brown actually published a list
with four, the three factors
that are known so far
that the fag blood PAB
blood glucose levels, and some
of them are the obvious
one was we talked about
like carbs and insulin, but
there's also stress illness, all
these variables that we can
accurately measure, and we could
get more sensors and more
data about exercise and other
kinds of activities that would
be helpful, but there will
always be these hidden and
measured components that we need
to address and respond to,
which is why automatic insulin
delivery systems are so important
because they take that burden
from the users. So instead
of tracking what happens for
the next one, two, three,
four hours after a bolus,
you might rely on this
system throughout the magically, adjust
to those unexpected changes or
that, that predictability and a
good algorithm will have ways
of dealing with, with those
unmeasured disturbances. It's not going
to work as well as
if you could measure everything
perfectly, accurately and adjust for
a mathematically, but there are
ways to deal with the
uncertainties that the sickly, Yeah.
We always have numbers in
our heads that we know,
like I know my, my
ratio of insulin to grams,
and I'm sure that mine
is different from yours. And
we think about those things,
but I'll make sure that
we include a link to
those. The 42 factors that
affect blood glucose. It's all
kinds of things you wouldn't
think about like sleep, no
too little sleep or someone
going through puberty or having
bad allergies. And one of
those is making my day
different than it was yesterday,
who knows which one of
them are many of them,
multiple factors that are causing
me trouble today. Th that
kind of requires a certain
cognitive load. Doesn't it? Don't
you feel like there's a
certain percentage of your brain.
That's always used up thinking
about diabetes, even when you're
not thinking about it. Yeah.
I think mental burden is
a big component of diabetes
and that there's that complexity.
But like I mentioned before,
I think it's, it's, there's
a tradeoff between that, that
effort, that level of effort
you're willing to put into
it or able to put
into it versus glycemic outcomes
versus safety. And a lot
of people who, who liked
to talk about diabetes and
in podcasts, or build their
own gadgets, or really involved
in this, and really mathematical
at trying to optimize for
glycaemic outcomes. But there are
also people who just don't
care for all that complexity
and just want to have
diabetes fade in the background,
even if that is, they
don't get the absolute best
time and range or best
glycaemic outcomes that they could.
And again, for the context
for the folks that are
listening, who may not be
familiar when we say things
like time in range or
glycemic outcomes, that's basically you
and I trying to simulate
that we don't have diabetes,
right? Because isn't the theory
that if we can get
the body to have as
normal sugar as possible, as
long as possible, then we'll,
we'll die of something else
we'll die of old age,
as opposed to dying of
a diabetic complication. We're simulating
not having diabetes. Right. Right.
So you want to stay
with it within a narrow
range and mimic healthy blood
sugar levels as, as much
as possible. And with a
lot of effort, you could
do that pretty well. And
with adjustments in your diet,
you could also do that
well, but it does take
a lot of effort and
throughout people's lives. For example,
for me, sometimes I, I
put a lot of emphasis
on glycaemic outcomes and sometimes
it said, okay, an estimated
glucose value of that that's
a little higher is okay,
right now during this time
for my life. It's, it's
okay. If my blood sugars
are a little bit higher,
because I'm trying to achieve
all these, these other things.
Exactly. Cause the stress, the
stress is itself difficult. So
run a little high and
be more mentally healthy, Right.
Or, or have bandwidth to
do other things. And, and
I think if, if you're
mathematically inclined, it's easy, but
that's why w new technologies
should relieve some of that
burden. We should really be
doing this math for people
and helping people who don't
want the absolute best clinical
outcomes. But when to put
in a lot less effort,
get much better outcomes that
they're getting today. Maybe not,
not as good as someone
who's constantly fiddling with their
device and estimating and knowing
about all these factors that
the device doesn't know about,
like exercise, stress illness, trying
to account for all of
these, but really giving them
the best outcomes they could
have for their lifestyle. Yeah.
That's a really great point
because I've been involved in
the, in the DIY, the
do it yourself, diabetes community,
since the nineties. And I
think it's enjoyable. And I
find the math interesting. And
I find the tinkering interesting,
but when I show it
to other people, they're like,
wow, that's just way more
work than I really need.
Even the finger sticks part,
people are losing patients with.
And that's why it's exciting
that there's new technology like
the Dexcom G six, that
does not necessarily require finger
sticks. And of course, the
company that you work for
tandem has a thing called
control IQ combined. The no
finger sticks means that like
a huge percentage of people
find that to be much
easier to use. They don't
have to think about the
math. They just are there.
I don't know. It almost
makes diabetes fade away for
a moment and they can
kind of pretend that it's
not happening, which is really
healthy, I think. Yep. It
really allows people to go
do the other things that
are important to them and
think about diabetes just a
little bit less and don't
get me wrong. There's still
a lot to think about.
There's a lot that go,
that goes into an insulin
pump and they chose into
diabetes education just to get
started using these devices, but
we've come a long way.
And I think it's, it's
a puzzle, not a mystery.
We know how to, how,
how to do more. I
like that. That's a really
great point. There is a
lot of cognitive load, but
there's, it's just an, if,
if you're going to become
diabetic, certainly today in 2020
is the time to do
it. No one wants to
manage databases. If they can
avoid it. That's why Mongo
DB made Mongo DB Atlas,
a global cloud database service
that runs on AWS, GCP
and Azure. You can deploy
a fully managed Mongo DB
database in minutes with just
a few clicks or a
few API calls, Mongo DB,
Atlas, automates deployment, automates updates,
handles scaling, and more so
that you can focus on
your application instead of taking
care of your database, you
can get started free@mongodb.com slash
Atlas. Now, if you're already
managing a Mongo DB deployment,
Atlas has a live migration
service, so you can migrate
it easily with minimal downtime
and then get back to
what matters. Stop managing your
database and start using Mongo
DB, Atlas. I'm curious, what
kind of problems would a
diabetes data scientist solve? Are
you solving control, loop, local,
immediate problems? Are you thinking
about huge datasets? Like I
have a massive personal data
set of my blood sugar
every five minutes for the
last decade. I don't know
what even kind of questions
I could ask that would
make my life better. What
kind of questions can a
diabetes data set scientists ask
to make lives better? Well,
there, there are lots of
it says problems. I think
data says is a very
large term, encompasses a lot
of disciplines. And even though
it's a recent term, there
have been data scientists around
for awhile. So for, for
diabetes, I think we could,
th data scientists could build
personalized algorithms for diabetes management,
like the control algorithms that
we were talking about or
prediction algorithms to see where
your blood glucose is headed
or what the effect of,
of the inputs into your,
your diabetes management they're having.
And then you can also
use it to inform decisions
and to make simpler products.
So when one of the
things I get very excited
about is how we, we
can big data from a
lot of users to evaluate
product features and feed those
insights back into product development.
And how could we use
data and simulations to further
simplify our products and make
them easier for the user?
Very interesting. I'm just, I'm,
I'm thinking about anonymized data
across multiple people. Like, you
know, here's 10, here's the
blood sugar for 10,000 people.
You're saying you can see
how they would do on
a new product. Well, there
are certainly things you could
simulate. And as George box
says, all models are wrong,
some are useful. So it
depends what you're trying to
do, but there are definitely
a lot of things you
can evaluate the specially designed
tradeoffs and things you could
test and say what well,
what, whether the differences between
this choice or that choice.
And then there are also
a lot of knobs and
the product, for example, one
of the typical insulin pumps
on the market today from,
from the different pump companies
has over a thousand settable
parameters that someone could go
in and tweak manually. It's,
it's a lot, for example,
for, for someone's physiology settings,
you could set different values
of three parameters every 30
minutes of the day. And
that, those aren't the only
examples. So some of those
engaged users, like the ones
in the do it yourself
community will spend their time
analyzing their own data and
really thinking about what they
did that day. What's affecting
their blood glucose levels and
turning these knobs to get
the perfect outcomes, but people
who are not mathematically inclined
or don't want to put
in as much effort into
this, don't find that fun,
really have to think about
a lot. So can we
use data science to figure
out how to remove some
of those knobs for people
who don't want to think
about them, or how do
set them by default? So
that they're better for the
majority of the population, which
ones are really important than
which ones are not things
like that. That is really
interesting. Okay. So then back
to the beginning of the
conversation around all of the
different factors that affect blood
glucose, you know, 40 plus
that are identified, but potentially
hundreds or thousands that are
either not easily identified or
not easily measured, you're saying
that you can experiment, you
can glean, you can assume
you can make smart decisions
about those, those factors, thereby
reducing the cognitive load for
people who may not want
to, but then you can
also leave those knobs for
those who want to click
advanced and maybe go and
dig into that Exactly. Or
you for those people who
want to go and do
more with it, he could
provide the information and then
they could decide what to
do with it. That is
very interesting. The amount of
little changes that I make
even now, 25, gosh, almost
30 years in his experiments.
It's always feels like every
day is an experiment. You
know, like for example, I'm
looking at my blood sugar
now, as it's starting to
level off the blood sugar
values that we were just
talking about, and I'm realizing,
you know, I should have
taken my insulin 20 or
30 minutes before. That's an
obvious first tip. It's something
I should have thought about
beforehand, but here's yet another
day, another experiment where I'm
like, Oh shoot. Now I'm
kicking myself. I should have,
I should have done that.
I've learned that lesson. Why
didn't I want to do
that? You could potentially have
software tell me that you
could remind me and nudge
me in the right direction.
I think different people find
different things like that that
are really helpful for them.
For me, for example, I,
I was an MDI user
for a while. I was
waiting for this time when
CGM would be accurate enough
that the extra complexity of
a pump or having it
on, on my body would
be worth it because I
would have all of this
data to make the pump,
do exactly what I wanted.
And at that time, when
I got on the pump,
I thought CGM would be
good. It wasn't actually that
great. That had a really
long lag for me. And
it was getting low feeling
hypoglycemia, treating it then maybe
an hour later, I'd get
the alarm. So I, but
because this exposed me to
the pump, I could see
the importance of having really
good basal rates. And there
were, there are these guidelines
for doing experiments to set
your basal rates correctly. And
if you do those, it's
a lot of effort than
most doctors or they'd be
these educators don't even tell
their patients about it because
most people would not go
through all of that. That
involves skipping a meal. And
just seeing as your blood
sugar perfectly flat, where you
want it to be when,
when you skip that meal
and tweaking your basal rate,
until you get that blood
sugar to be perfectly flat
when you're not eating or
performing in any kind of
activity that affects blood, blood
sugar levels. But I've found
personally that when you do
that, you're in this very
stable state where you can
make a lot of decisions
easily and your blood sugar
is a lot less variable.
So for folks who may
not be familiar with those
words of bolus is a,
an injection or a moment
where a, a significant amount
of insulin is introduced into
your body while basil is
those little, that little background
insulin. Sometimes when I describe
it to non-diabetics, I think
about when you're driving the
car and you're trying to
keep the car straight on
the freeway for a long
period of time, you know,
how you just kind of
jiggle the wheel a little
bit, just to stay in
the, you don't even know
you're doing it. You want
to just stay straight. That's
your Bazell and then begging
a big left turn or
big right turn. That's your,
that's your bolus, but would
you just describe taking a
day fasting, not eating, doing
a, an experiment on yourself
as if you're a control
subject that requires a lot
to asking a lot of
anybody to do, but at
the same time, if someone
does do it, they should
get some value out of
it and really learn more
about their body. Yep. And
it gives you a really
good place to start from
where you have to react
to less. So I think
about it as putting all
this effort upfront so that
when you're out doing the
things you want to be
doing, you get interrupted by
diabetes less. Yeah. You know,
it's interesting. I haven't done
that in awhile. I think
it's been four or five
years. It might be a
thing that one would want
to do every once in
a while to just make
sure nothing's changed. Right. Cause
we get older. We, our
weight fluctuates our health fluctuates.
It might be time for
me to do that again.
These are that, that's the
other thing you get used
to your body and, and
how it moves and how
it works. So you're always
having to reinvent your own
diabetes therapy as you, as
you deal with this disease
over a period of time.
Yeah. And if you make
small changes, you could figure
out when, when things are
changing throughout, if you start
with, with, from a good
place where your basal rates
are working, you might make
smaller adjustments without having to
fast in between two to
test this really accurately. But
I think it's really important
that the beginning, and then
just, just being aware of
it, then making adjustments, when,
when necessary, How quickly do
you think that the idea
of an often automated insulin
dosing system is going to
become like the standard of
care? There's a lot of
talk about them right now.
They're available to those who
can get the insurance, who
can afford them. But I
do think, I don't think
it would be fair to
say that it is the
standard of care right now.
It's kind of an emerging
standard. I think automated insulin
delivery systems that are great.
Then, like you were saying,
people like us who have
great insurance and have access
to them, it really removes
some of the burden and
improves clinical outcomes. So it
it's great, but it's still
not accessible to a lot
of people. And part of
it is cost. Part of
it is, you know, geography,
the healthcare system, there are
also complexity issues like with
all technology initially it's great
for early adopters and the
only through, through simplifying it
and making it easier and
easier to use becomes standard
of care. And then even
insulin pumps. To your point,
you said that you used
MDI multiple daily injections for
awhile, even insulin pumps themselves,
aren't quite standard of care
because of all the different
reasons that you described. I
wonder at some point, have
you ever felt as a
diabetic that they, the, the,
your doctors, those, the people
in power have told you
that we'll have this cured
in five years? I feel
like for the last 20
or 30 years, they've been
telling me just five more
years and we'll have a
solution. And it feels like
maybe from five years from
now automated insulin dosing will
be the standard of care.
And then they'll be another
thing. And another thing, do
you see an end to
this? Or what, what do
you think the perfect answer
is? Well, that's interesting. No
one's ever promised Me a
cure so far. I, I
think obviously if we had
a cure, it could all
stop, but so far we've
been addressing diabetes management, not
the underlying causes. So I
think in that area, I
think the first automated insulin
delivery systems were built in
the, there were two when
they were built in the
sixties and seventies. So there
was a portable one that
someone was wearing with a
backpack out there in the
sixties. And I think it
worked pretty well. And then
there was when in the
hospital system that was also
working pretty well. It was
very big system, definitely not
portable. So it took a
really long time to actually
have an actual portable wearable
device. And they think that
that kind of improvement, like
the, the algorithm improvements came.
There's a lot that we
were able to achieve algorithmically,
but there's also a lot
left to do in terms
of usability to make this
work for everyone, to be
able to just put it
on and do nothing, which
I think is the Holy
grail of a fully closed
loop systems. Just, just put
it on and it just
works and you don't have
to know anything or do
anything. And you feel that
that's a problem that we
will solve with, to a
large part with software, with
data science, like there is
work to be done. We
have not solved this yet.
We haven't found the answer,
but we will be able
to, or these will be
able to move it forward
a little bit every year.
I think we'll be able
to move it forward. There's
still a lot left to
be done. And a lot
that we know how to
solve humans will always have
to be in the loop.
It's, it's your safety. You're
always have to change your
devices, do a little maintenance
troubleshoot when things go wrong.
But I think we, we
can, there's still a lot
to be done and we,
we know how to do
a lot of it. Well,
thank you so much, dr.
Alex Constantine for chatting with
me today. Thank you very
much for having me. It
was fun. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week. .